readme.md, before:

# Friend Connection

## _Overview_

To Develop a "Friend Connection" application that allows users to connect with friends,
send and receive friend requests, and get live updates on friends' statuses.

### _Tools and Technogolies used for development_

**Server Side (Backend)**:

- Typescript
- Express
- MongoDB

**Client Side (Frontend)**:

- Typescript
- Reactjs
- Redux and Redux Toolkit for state management
- Tailwind CSS for styling

**Code Versioning and Deployment**:

- Git & Github
- Docker

## Features

Below are the list of available implemented features

- [x] Anyone can read all the post available on the platform.
- [x] A user can join the platform with a unique identifier (username or email).
- [x] Users can update their status on the platform after joining
- [x] Users on the platform can request for connection by sending friend requests
- [x] Users on the platform can accept or decline friend requests from peers
- [x] Users on the platform can click on a post to view the profile of the person who owns the post
- [x] When a friend request is sent to a peer, they get notified of the request on their profile
- [x] When a request is accepted, the sender get notified of this event
- [x] When request is declined by a peer, it gets deleted from the server so as to allow for future connections
- [x] Users can view their profile on their dashboad
- [x] User can view their notifations when then click on the not icon
- [x] Users can reports peers status content when they see it inappriopriate
- [x] Users can read friends posts
- [x] Users can block peers when they see it fit
- [x] Peers get notified with socket events when they receive a connection request (Only implemented on the server side)
<!-- - Note: The unchecked box means those particular feature are not ready yet but still under production or building.
- More features may still be added to the `Diary API` as an update, until it is fully ready. -->

## API Documentation

### _Backend_

+**API documentation**:

## Models (Document) <br>

### Users

| Field         | Validation | Constraint  | Data Type                     |
| ------------- | ---------- | ----------- | ----------------------------- |
| id            | -          | Primary Key | ObjectId                      |
| username      | -          | -           | String                        |
| email         | -          | -           | String                        |
| status        | -          | -           | String                        |
| friends       | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| blocked_users | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| report_count  | -          | -           | Number                        |
| reported_by   | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| created_at    | -          | -           | Date                          |
| updated_at    | -          | -           | Date                          |

### Friend Request

| Field       | Validation                                  | Constraint          | Data Type            |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------- | ------------------- | -------------------- |
| id          | -                                           | Primary Key         | ObjectId             |
| sender_id   | Required                                    | Reference to "user" | ObjectId (ref: user) |
| receiver_id | Required                                    | Reference to "user" | ObjectId (ref: user) |
| status      | Required, Enum: pending, accepted, declined | -                   | String               |
| created_at  | -                                           | -                   | Date                 |
| updated_at  | -                                           | -                   | Date                 |

### Notification

| Field       | Validation                                                                                      | Constraint                     | Data Type                       |
| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| id          | -                                                                                               | Primary Key                    | ObjectId                        |
| receiver_id | Required                                                                                        | Reference to "user"            | ObjectId (ref: user)            |
| request_id  | Required                                                                                        | Reference to "friend_requests" | ObjectId (ref: friend_requests) |
| message     | Required                                                                                        | -                              | String                          |
| type        | Required, Enum: friend_request, friend_request_accepted, friend_request_rejected, status_update | -                              | String                          |
| created_at  | -                                                                                               | -                              | Date                            |
| updated_at  | -                                                                                               | -                              | Date                            |

### Home Page

- Route: /v1/ping
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Response: Success

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "environment": "development",
  "msg": "Pong"
}
```

### User Signup <br>

- Route: /v1/auth/signup
- Method: POST
- Header
  - Authorization: None

**Note**: You either sign up with email or a unique username

- Body:

```json
{
  "email": "johndoe@example.com"
}
```

- Responses: Success

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

- Throws a duplicate error when you try signing up with same payload

```json
{
  "code": 409,
  "error": "CONFLICT_REQUEST_ERROR",
  "status": "error",
  "msg": "User with johndoe@gmail.com already exists"
}
```

- Sign up with username
- Body:

```json
{
  "username": "Johndoe"
}
```

- Response

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "username": "Johndoe",
    "email": null,
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get Users

- Route: /v1/users
- Method: GET
- Body:

- Responses: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": [
    {
      "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
      "username": "Johndoe",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
      "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "_id": "661c009b7ace2f00a7cb0216",
      "username": "tJrr",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "createdAt": "2024-04-14T16:13:15.595Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-14T16:13:15.595Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "_id": "661d4962cc6eff6ccebadf38",
      "username": "test",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-15T15:36:02.343Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-15T15:36:02.343Z",
      "__v": 0
    }
  ]
}
```

### Get User Profile

- Route: /v1/users/profile
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "username": "Johndoe",
    "email": null,
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get User By their ID

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get Notification Belonging to a user via the user Id

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/notifications
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": [
    {
      "_id": "661dc8c91f3dcf4011220eea",
      "receiver_id": "661d4962cc6eff6ccebadf38",
      "request_id": "661dc8c91f3dcf4011220ee8",
      "message": "You have a new friend request from JohnDoe",
      "type": "friend_request",
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T00:39:37.311Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T00:39:37.311Z",
      "__v": 0
    }
  ]
}
```

### Block a user

**Note**: The id on the url belongs to the user performing the block actions while the other id sent as a payload on the body of the request belongs to the user who is getting block

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/block
- Method: PATCH
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "blockedUserId": "661d4b6dcc6eff6ccebadf47"
}
```

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "User blocked successfully"
}
```

### Report a User status or content

The same applies to reporting a user content, the ID of the user making the report is passed on the route url parameter

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/report
- Method: PATCH
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "reportUserId": "661d4b6dcc6eff6ccebadf47"
}
```

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "User content reported successfully"
}
```

### Send friend request

- Route: /v1/friend-request
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "sender_id": "661c008b7ace2f00a7cb0210",
  "receiver_id": "661d4bc2cc6eff6ccebadf4c"
}
```

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request sent successfully"
}
```

### Accept Friend Request

**Note**: The request id is the friend request that was sent, when a friend request was sent it created a data on the friends model with a default pending state

- Route: /v1/friend-request/661e8bdf80656a9443e98fc9/accept
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request accepted successfully"
}
```

### Decline Request

- Route: /v1/friend-request/661e8bdf80656a9443e98fc9/decline
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request accepted successfully"
}
```

## Client side Doc (Frontend)

Below are the visuals of the client side build with react and typescript, using redux and redux toolkit for state management and tailwind for styling

![](./assets/hero.png)
![](./assets/popup.png)
![](./assets/login.png)
![](./assets/dashboardheader.png)
![](./assets/update.png)

## Getting Started To Set and Run locally

### Prerequisites

In order to run this project locally, you would need to have the following installed on your local machine.

- node ^18.10,
- MongoDB
- Docker - optional

### Installation

- Clone this repository

```
git clone [https://github.com/Nkasi-e/kor-task.git]
```

- **Setting up the client app**
  After successful installation and cloning, to run the client app

- `cd into kor-task and then cd into the client folder inside it`
- Download all dependencies using the command `npm install`, when npm finish installing
- run the command `npm run dev`

- **Setting up the server**
- `cd into kor-task and then cd into the server folder inside it`
- Download all dependencies using the command `npm install`, when npm finish installing
- run the command `npm run dev`

**complete walkthrough**

```bash
# FOR THE CLIENT SIDE
cd kor-task
cd client
npm install
npm run dev

# FOR SERVER
cd kor-task
cd server
npm install
npm run dev
```

### _Setting up with docker (optional)_

```bash
# on your parent kor-task directory run the command to build and spin up a container

docker compose build up -d

# Add the -d to run in detached mode

```

## Thank You!

Commit message:

Added documention and remove dummy data from the client side

readme.md, after:

# Friend Connection

## _Overview_

To Develop a "Friend Connection" application that allows users to connect with friends,
send and receive friend requests, and get live updates on friends' statuses.

### _Tools and Technogolies used for development_

**Server Side (Backend)**:

- Typescript
- Express
- MongoDB

**Client Side (Frontend)**:

- Typescript
- Reactjs
- Redux and Redux Toolkit for state management
- Tailwind CSS for styling

**Code Versioning and Deployment**:

- Git & Github
- Docker

## Features

Below are the list of available implemented features

- [x] Anyone can read all the post available on the platform.
- [x] A user can join the platform with a unique identifier (username or email).
- [x] Users can update their status on the platform after joining
- [x] Users on the platform can request for connection by sending friend requests
- [x] Users on the platform can accept or decline friend requests from peers
- [x] Users on the platform can click on a post to view the profile of the person who owns the post
- [x] When a friend request is sent to a peer, they get notified of the request on their profile
- [x] When a request is accepted, the sender get notified of this event
- [x] When request is declined by a peer, it gets deleted from the server so as to allow for future connections
- [x] Users can view their profile on their dashboad
- [x] User can view their notifations when then click on the not icon
- [x] Users can reports peers status content when they see it inappriopriate
- [x] Users can read friends posts
- [x] Users can block peers when they see it fit
- [x] Peers get notified with socket events when they receive a connection request (Only implemented on the server side)
<!-- - Note: The unchecked box means those particular feature are not ready yet but still under production or building.
- More features may still be added to the `Diary API` as an update, until it is fully ready. -->

### Assumptions

My assumptions are mostly on the user flow, I assumed for a user to be able to send a friend request or report a post they should register or join the platorm so as to have a record of them, also since there is no form of authentication one of the method I assumed was good for remembering a user was to store their data since there is no token attached, using local storage.
Another assumption was on my schema design how I handle status and users storage, I assumed a user can only update their status without creating a new status, that lead to added the status field of the user document, this by the is not an effiecient method as it makes the schema tightly coupled and making it less flexible to perform operations on the status field, I believe one of the efficient was this should be is making the user and status models a seprate entity which references themselves, that way the status and user entity will be more flexible and independent of each other

## API Documentation

### _Backend_

+**API documentation**:

## Models (Document) <br>

### Users

| Field         | Validation | Constraint  | Data Type                     |
| ------------- | ---------- | ----------- | ----------------------------- |
| id            | -          | Primary Key | ObjectId                      |
| username      | -          | -           | String                        |
| email         | -          | -           | String                        |
| status        | -          | -           | String                        |
| friends       | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| blocked_users | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| report_count  | -          | -           | Number                        |
| reported_by   | -          | -           | Array of ObjectId (ref: user) |
| created_at    | -          | -           | Date                          |
| updated_at    | -          | -           | Date                          |

### Friend Request

| Field       | Validation                                  | Constraint          | Data Type            |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------- | ------------------- | -------------------- |
| id          | -                                           | Primary Key         | ObjectId             |
| sender_id   | Required                                    | Reference to "user" | ObjectId (ref: user) |
| receiver_id | Required                                    | Reference to "user" | ObjectId (ref: user) |
| status      | Required, Enum: pending, accepted, declined | -                   | String               |
| created_at  | -                                           | -                   | Date                 |
| updated_at  | -                                           | -                   | Date                 |

### Notification

| Field       | Validation                                                                                      | Constraint                     | Data Type                       |
| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| id          | -                                                                                               | Primary Key                    | ObjectId                        |
| receiver_id | Required                                                                                        | Reference to "user"            | ObjectId (ref: user)            |
| request_id  | Required                                                                                        | Reference to "friend_requests" | ObjectId (ref: friend_requests) |
| message     | Required                                                                                        | -                              | String                          |
| type        | Required, Enum: friend_request, friend_request_accepted, friend_request_rejected, status_update | -                              | String                          |
| created_at  | -                                                                                               | -                              | Date                            |
| updated_at  | -                                                                                               | -                              | Date                            |

### Home Page

- Route: /v1/ping
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Response: Success

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "environment": "development",
  "msg": "Pong"
}
```

### User Signup <br>

- Route: /v1/auth/signup
- Method: POST
- Header
  - Authorization: None

**Note**: You either sign up with email or a unique username

- Body:

```json
{
  "email": "johndoe@example.com"
}
```

- Responses: Success

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

- Throws a duplicate error when you try signing up with same payload

```json
{
  "code": 409,
  "error": "CONFLICT_REQUEST_ERROR",
  "status": "error",
  "msg": "User with johndoe@gmail.com already exists"
}
```

- Sign up with username
- Body:

```json
{
  "username": "Johndoe"
}
```

- Response

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "username": "Johndoe",
    "email": null,
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get Users

- Route: /v1/users
- Method: GET
- Body:

- Responses: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": [
    {
      "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
      "username": "Johndoe",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
      "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "friends": [],
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "_id": "661c009b7ace2f00a7cb0216",
      "username": "tJrr",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "createdAt": "2024-04-14T16:13:15.595Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-14T16:13:15.595Z",
      "__v": 0
    },
    {
      "blocked_users": [],
      "report_count": 0,
      "reported_by": [],
      "_id": "661d4962cc6eff6ccebadf38",
      "username": "test",
      "email": null,
      "status": null,
      "friends": [],
      "createdAt": "2024-04-15T15:36:02.343Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-15T15:36:02.343Z",
      "__v": 0
    }
  ]
}
```

### Get User Profile

- Route: /v1/users/profile
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "username": "Johndoe",
    "email": null,
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e78528ebad530f54f141a",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:08:34.220Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get User By their ID

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": {
    "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
    "status": null,
    "friends": [],
    "blocked_users": [],
    "report_count": 0,
    "reported_by": [],
    "_id": "661e77248ebad530f54f1416",
    "createdAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T13:03:33.006Z",
    "__v": 0
  }
}
```

### Get Notification Belonging to a user via the user Id

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/notifications
- Method: GET
- Header
  - Authorization: None
- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": [
    {
      "_id": "661dc8c91f3dcf4011220eea",
      "receiver_id": "661d4962cc6eff6ccebadf38",
      "request_id": "661dc8c91f3dcf4011220ee8",
      "message": "You have a new friend request from JohnDoe",
      "type": "friend_request",
      "createdAt": "2024-04-16T00:39:37.311Z",
      "updatedAt": "2024-04-16T00:39:37.311Z",
      "__v": 0
    }
  ]
}
```

### Block a user

**Note**: The id on the url belongs to the user performing the block actions while the other id sent as a payload on the body of the request belongs to the user who is getting block

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/block
- Method: PATCH
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "blockedUserId": "661d4b6dcc6eff6ccebadf47"
}
```

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "User blocked successfully"
}
```

### Report a User status or content

The same applies to reporting a user content, the ID of the user making the report is passed on the route url parameter

- Route: /v1/users/661e77248ebad530f54f1416/report
- Method: PATCH
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "reportUserId": "661d4b6dcc6eff6ccebadf47"
}
```

- Response: Success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "User content reported successfully"
}
```

### Send friend request

- Route: /v1/friend-request
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

```json
{
  "sender_id": "661c008b7ace2f00a7cb0210",
  "receiver_id": "661d4bc2cc6eff6ccebadf4c"
}
```

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 201,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request sent successfully"
}
```

### Accept Friend Request

**Note**: The request id is the friend request that was sent, when a friend request was sent it created a data on the friends model with a default pending state

- Route: /v1/friend-request/661e8bdf80656a9443e98fc9/accept
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request accepted successfully"
}
```

### Decline Request

- Route: /v1/friend-request/661e8bdf80656a9443e98fc9/decline
- Method: POST
- Header

  - Authorization: None

- Body:

- Response: success

```json
{
  "code": 200,
  "status": "ok",
  "data": "Friend request accepted successfully"
}
```

## Client side Doc (Frontend)

Below are the visuals of the client side build with react and typescript, using redux and redux toolkit for state management and tailwind for styling

![](./assets/hero.png)
![](./assets/popup.png)
![](./assets/login.png)
![](./assets/dashboardheader.png)
![](./assets/update.png)

## Getting Started To Set and Run locally

### Prerequisites

In order to run this project locally, you would need to have the following installed on your local machine.

- node ^18.10,
- MongoDB
- Docker - optional

### Installation

- Clone this repository

```
git clone [https://github.com/Nkasi-e/kor-task.git]
```

- **Setting up the client app**
  After successful installation and cloning, to run the client app

- `cd into kor-task and then cd into the client folder inside it`
- Download all dependencies using the command `npm install`, when npm finish installing
- run the command `npm run dev`

- **Setting up the server**
- `cd into kor-task and then cd into the server folder inside it`
- Download all dependencies using the command `npm install`, when npm finish installing
- run the command `npm run dev`

**complete walkthrough**

```bash
# FOR THE CLIENT SIDE
cd kor-task
cd client
npm install
npm run dev

# FOR SERVER
cd kor-task
cd server
npm install
npm run dev
```

### _Setting up with docker (optional)_

```bash
# on your parent kor-task directory run the command to build and spin up a container

docker compose build up -d

# Add the -d to run in detached mode

```

## Thank You!
